The Effortless Life
(A Concise Manual for Contentment,  Mindfulness, & Flow)

by Leo Babauta

Written publicly, with help from the world

--
Introduction

Life is hard. Or so we’ve imagined. 
The truth is that life is only as difficult as we make it. 
Most of  us rush around doing a lot of  tasks and errands each 
day,  putting  out  fires,  and  dealing  with  dramas.  Most  of  these 
struggles are invented. 
We  are simple beings. Food, shelter, clothing and relationships 
are all we need to be happy. Food grows simply and naturally. Shelter is a simple roof. Clothing is just cloth. Simple relationships consist of  enjoying each other’s company without expectations.
Beyond  these  simple  needs,  we’ve  added  invented  needs:  careers, bosses and co-workers; new gadgets, software and social media; cars and  nice  clothes and purses and  laptop  bags and  televisions and more.
I’m not saying that we should go back to caveman days, but it’s 
important that we remember what’s necessary and what’s invented. 
When  we  realize  that  something  is invented,  we  can  choose  to 
eliminate that need; if  it doesn’t serve a good purpose, if  it makes 
life more difficult, it can go!
By stripping away the things that make  life difficult, we’re left 
with an effortless life.
I learned an important lesson when I wanted to become a better  swimmer—I  thought swimming  farther  and  faster  was just a 
matter  of  trying  harder,  training  harder.  I  would  thrash  madly 
through the water, but was left exhausted. When I learned that the 
water can actually push you up and help you float, it became much 
easier to glide through it. I relaxed, stopped trying to force things, 
and learned to swim better with less effort.

Life is like  this. Life  is water, and  we  tend  to  push  too hard, 
thrash about, force things, struggle. Instead, learn to float, learn to 
allow things to become effortless. You’ll get farther and life will be 
that much more pleasant. What is an Effortless Life?
Imagine a life where you wake up and do what you love doing. 
You spend time with the people you love and enjoy that time completely. You live in the moment, without worry for the future, with-
out dwelling on past mistakes.
Imagine that you have a few close friends and family members, 
and you spend ample time with them. You have no expectations of 
them, therefore, they don’t disappoint you, and,  in fact, whatever 
they do is perfect. You love them for  who they are, and your relationships remain uncomplicated.
You enjoy spending time in solitude—with your thoughts, with 
nature, with a book, and maybe even creating.
This is a simple, effortless life. It’s not effortless as in “no effort,” 
but it feels effortless, and that’s what matters. And it’s entirely possible.
The only thing that stands in the way of  an effortless life is the 
mind.

--

Guidelines for an Effortless Life

These  are  not rigid  rules. And  they are  in  the  negative  for  a 
reason: this guide doesn’t tell you what to do. It tells you what not 
to do, so that you don’t create unnecessary effort. What you do is 
left up to you.
GUIDELINES:
• Cause no harm.
• Have no fixed goals or plans.
• Have no expectations.
• Don’t create false needs.
• Do nothing you hate.
• Don’t rush.
• Create no unnecessary actions.
SOME POSSIBLE POSITIVE GUIDELINES:
• Be compassionate.
• Be passionate.
• Find contentment.
• Go slowly.
• Be patient.
• Be present.
• Prefer subtraction.

--

Wu Wei & Doing Nothing

Taoism has a concept that’s difficult for the Western mind: Wu 
Wei, often translated as “not-doing” or “without action.” I prefer to 
think of  it as knowing when not to act, and knowing when it’s appropriate to act.
This is difficult for us in the Western tradition of  “doing.” Our 
culture values action, and inaction breeds anxiety. This way of  living, however, is the root of  many difficulties in our lives—we create 
unnecessary efforts because  we’re  uncomfortable with  the state  of 
“not doing.”
Is it possible to do nothing? Not literally—even if  we’re not acting, we’re sitting or lying or standing. But acting usually means taking an action, often toward a goal and with a purpose. What if  we 
removed the goal or purpose? Then the action is unnecessary, and 
taking it would make things unnecessarily difficult.
So, removing goals and simplifying purpose  removes the  need 
for many actions.
It’s extremely hard for us to accept this thought. We want to be 
productive.  The  word  “passive”  has  such  negative  connotations 
that we shy away from doing nothing. Our culture disdains laziness. 
And so we do things that aren’t necessary, and we create arbitrary 
goals because we feel we must.
What if  we stop measuring our worth by our accomplishments? 
Who we are will always be more important than what we do. Try 
doing nothing. Even just for five minutes. We become anxious and 
want to open a new tab, check email, read the news, talk to some-
one,  do  a task.  And  that’s just for  five  minutes—what  if  we  did 
nothing all day?
If  we remove false needs, goals, expectations, and purposes, we 
strip away the need to do much of  what we do. We can then be left 
with an emptiness that can be filled only with what’s necessary, with 
what’s natural, with what’s beautiful.

--
True Needs, Simple Needs

So  what’s really necessary? I  mentioned  above  that our  basic 
needs are few: food, clothing, shelter, relationships.
None of  these needs are complicated.
You might argue that getting food can be complicated, but read 
“One  Straw  Revolution” by  Masanobu  Fukuoka—he  shows that 
we can  grow enough for  a family on an acre of  land, intervening 
minimally with  nature. Let weeds grow, use no pesticide, don’t till 
the soil, let animals and bugs and lizards run wild among the ﬁelds. 
It’s not complicated.
That doesn’t mean we’re all going to return to the land tomorrow, but it’s important to remember that our true needs have been 
complicated only by the  society we’ve created, and that food need 
not be another status symbol. And thus we have the ability to cre-
ate something simpler, by subtraction.
Shelter  has also  been  made complicated—housing is the  biggest expense for many people, and a beautiful home is now an ex-
pensive  status symbol.  But at its most basic,  shelter  consists of  a 
roof  that protects us from the elements. It can be a one-man lean-
to, or a large shelter for several families. It can be as simple as we’d 
like it to be.
Clothing, too, has been  made  far  more complicated. It’s been 
turned into a status symbol so complexly contrived that it has be-
come many times removed from a true need. We really just need to 
cover  ourselves,  and  as Gandhi  showed,  all  you  need  is a  bit  of 
homespun  cloth.  Again,  we’re  probably not going  to  be  wearing 
loincloths  anytime  soon,  but  let’s remember  how  much  of  our 
clothing ﬁlls a true need, and how much is invented.

Relationships are  probably  the  most  complicated  among  our 
needs, because humans are  complicated  entities not easily simpliﬁed. We want to belong. We want to look good in the eyes of  our 
peers, to be attractive to others. So relationships have evolved into 
webs of  interaction and emotions and expectations so complicated 
that they can’t be easily untangled.
It doesn’t have to be so difﬁcult. I get together with a friend, let 
the  rest of  the  world  melt away, and focus on being present. We 
talk, we joke, and we have no expectations of  each other. We walk 
away without feeling hurt, and have no worries about when we’re 
going to get back together. 
My marriage and my relationships with my kids are more com-
plicated than  that,  but I’m  learning to  subtract expectations and 
needs, so that what remains is the pure  enjoyment of  each family 
member for who he or  she is. I’m not there yet, but I’m learning. 
Subtraction  leaves just  the  essence, just what we  need  from relationships.
Our contribution to society can of  course become just as com-
plicated. This usually involves our jobs, and it takes up  a majority 
of  our lives and makes up a majority of  our stress and frustrations. 
But part  of  the  reason  for  this are  the  long hours that we  must 
work in  order to support invented  needs. If  we  reduce  our  needs 
and learn to be content with little, we need to work little to survive.
That leaves us with a lot of  free time to contribute to society in 
very  simple  ways.  We  can  volunteer  with  charities,  create  some-
thing amazing, help others in our neighborhoods. We can do good 
and  let  go of  it,  with  no  expectation  of  reward,  of  payment,  of 
praise. Or we can simply be available so that when others need us, 
we won’t always be in a hard-charging mode toward our own goals.
Those are our needs, and they are simple.

--
Reduce Your Needs

As I've said, our true needs are very simple. In modern society, 
we have created more needs: you need a job to pay for your home 
and  clothes and  car  and  computers and  fuel and  electricity  and 
food and going out and entertainment and education and more.
If  you  reduce  your  needs and  learn  to  be  content with  little, 
you will need to do very little. Your reduced needs result in reduced 
effort.
If  you  have  few needs,  you  have  few  expenses, and  you  then 
have  reduced  need  for  work.  You  can  work  less and  play  more. 
You're also freed up to do work that you love, as you won't have to 
earn very much from that passionate work, giving yourself  freedom 
to fail for a while.
If  you  have few  needs, you  have  less pressure  to  succeed  and 
you can relax more. You don't worry as much, because there's little 
to worry about.
Reducing your needs is a slow and mindful process. You  don't 
need to slash everything overnight. Pay attention to your spending, 
to  what you do  each week, and ask yourself  whether these things 
and activities are truly necessary.
Start to slowly pare back,  cutting one  expensive  activity after 
another. Do you really need that Starbucks coffee every day, or can 
you  make  your  own, or  drink water  instead?  Do you  really need 
expensive snacks, or can you eat fruit and nuts? Do you really need 
to  partake in  expensive  entertainment, or  can you play with  your 
kids or hang out with a few friends in the park? Do you really need 
the gym membership, or can you go on walks with your spouse or 
do push-ups outdoors?

Slowly start to look at the bigger  expenses: Do you really need 
two cars? Can  you trade  your  SUV for  a smaller,  less expensive, 
used car? Can you give your car up for a bike or mass transit? Do 
you  really need  such  a large home? Can  you  move  to  someplace 
smaller,  less expensive, less costly  to  heat  or  cool?  Do  you  really 
need such an expensive education, or can you educate yourself  for 
free?
I'm not saying you have to give any or all of  these things up—
I'm suggesting you pay attention, and slowly pare back so that most 
of  what you spend is spent on the essentials.
The things that make you happy don't have to cost a lot. Some 
of  my essentials:
• A good book—which can be found at the library.
• A notebook or laptop for writing.
• A walk outdoors.
• Tea with my wife.
• Playing with my kids.
• A run with a friend.
That's pretty much all I need beyond the basic necessities (food, 
clothing, shelter, etc.) to be happy. And none of  those things costs 
very much.
Reduce  your  needs,  be  content with  little, and  life's required 
effort drops by a mile.


--
Cause No Harm, & Be Compassionate

This is my basic rule for living, and it has served me well. It has 
made my life less difficult:
• Relationships are easier and more rewarding.
• People tend to be kinder to me.
• Being known as a kind person opens more doors. 
• I’m happier.
• Everyone around me is a bit happier.
The first guideline of  Effortless Living is to cause no harm. It’s 
first because it affects everything else. If  the guideline “don’t rush” 
will cause harm, for example, then you should ignore “don’t rush” 
in favor of  “cause no harm.”
When you cause harm, it creates ripples of  problems that make 
life  more  difficult  for  yourself  and  those  you  have  harmed.  You 
then become burdened with the obligation to rectify your mistakes 
and  seek forgiveness,  which  are  both  long  and  tedious tasks that 
could easily have been avoided. 
How does this play out in everyday life? Here are some examples:
• Don’t kill or be violent toward others if  that will harm them.
• Don’t pollute or do things that will harm the health of  others.
• Don’t drink and drive, or do other negligent things that might 
injure others.
• Don’t eat animals or animal products.
• Don’t employ  others in  an  oppressive  way,  or  use  products 
made by workers who are oppressed.
• Don’t  spread  information  that  will  lead  to  others  being 
harmed.
• Don’t steal or take things from people if  that will harm them.
• Don’t withhold resources from people if  that will harm them.
• Don’t  stand  idly  by  or  be  silent  if  you  see  others  being 
harmed.
• Don’t do to others what you would not want done to yourself.
• Don't force your beliefs on others.
• Don’t lie.
• Don’t buy things you don’t really need (don’t harm the environment).
Often “causing no harm” leads to difficult choices—sometimes 
you  have  to  figure  out  what  action  (or  non-action)  leads  to  less 
harm.

The positive side of  this principle is “be compassionate.” This 
often involves a complete change in the way that we think. Instead 
of  judging others, for example, being compassionate  means to try 
to understand them better, to empathize, and to try to relieve them 
from pain.
Compassionate living is a topic that deserves an entire book—
I’d recommend The Art of  Happiness, by the Dalai Lama. In brief, 
it  requires understanding,  empathy,  and  the  desire  to  lessen  the 
pain and increase the happiness of  others.

--
Have No Goals or Fixed Plans

The  idea  of  having  concrete,  achievable  goals  seems  to  be 
deeply ingrained  in our culture. I  know that I lived with goals for 
many years, and, in fact, a big part of  my past writings are about 
how one can set and achieve goals.
These days, however, I live without goals, for the most part. It’s 
liberating,  and  contrary to  what you  might have  been  taught,  it 
doesn’t mean that you stop achieving things.
It means that you stop letting yourself  be limited by goals.
Consider this common belief: “You’ll never get anywhere unless 
you know where you’re going.” This seems like common sense, yet 
it’s obviously not true if  you really think about it. Conduct a simple 
experiment: go outside  and  walk in  a random direction, and  feel 
free to change directions randomly. After twenty minutes, an hour . 
. . you’ll be somewhere! You just didn’t know you were going to end 
up there.
And  there’s the  rub:  you  have  to  open  your  mind  to  going 
places you  never  expected  to go. If  you live without goals,  you’ll 
explore  new territory. You’ll learn some unexpected things. You’ll 
end up in  surprising places.  That’s the beauty of  this philosophy, 
but it’s also a difficult transition.
Today, I live mostly without goals. Now and then I start coming 
up  with  a goal, but I’m letting them go. Living without goals has 
never been an actual goal of  mine . . . it’s just something I’m learning that I enjoy, that is freeing, that works with the  lifestyle of  following my passion.


THREE IMPORTANT NOTES
Many people have  a problem with  my “no goals” experiment, 
so I’m going to make three notes before we get into it:

1. My  Definition  of  “Goal”:  I  don’t  define  goal  as “any-
thing you want to do”.  I’m not talking about getting rid  of  all 
desires. I’m talking about letting go of  predefined outcomes. So 
“goal” means “predefined outcome or destination”. If  you start 
walking, without knowing where  you’re going, you could  say, “I 
have a goal of  walking!” But you don’t know where you’re going. 
If  instead you start walking to go to the store, that’s a walk with 
a goal. When people say, “You’re doing something, so therefore 
you have goals!”, my response is, “Yes, but I don’t know or care 
where it takes me.” (Btw, this is a symptom of  the Gotcha Syndrome, where people  try to point out my hypocrisies instead  of 
actually trying the recommendations.)

2. You don’t have to try it. If  living without goals seems stupid or too extreme for you, don’t try it. It doesn’t matter to me if 
you  disagree  with  me  on  this point  -- it works for  me,  but it 
might not work for  you.  That’s OK.  The  other  things in  this 
book  are  still useful. And  who  knows,  maybe  some  day  you’ll 
come back to this and consider it.

3. Did I need goals when I started? Many people say that 
it’s fine for me to not need goals now, but that’s only because I’ve 
already accomplished a lot, and have gotten to the point where I 
don’t need  goals.  That’s fine  -- you  can believe  that ...  or, you 
could  just  try living  and  working  without goals,  and  see  what 
happens. I  don’t know if  I needed goals when  I  started  -- how 
can I go back and test it? My guess is I wouldn’t be where I am 
now, if  I started by using these ideas, but I would be somewhere 
great.

THE PROBLEM WITH GOALS
In  the past, I’d set a goal or three for the  year, and  then  sub-
goals for each month. Then I’d figure out what action steps to take 
each week and each day, and try to focus my day on those steps.
Unfortunately, it never, ever works out this neatly. You all know 
this.  You  get  busy  or  procrastinate  or  life  gets in  the  way,  your 
weekly goals and  monthly goals get pushed  back or  side-tracked, 
you become discouraged because you have no discipline. Then you 
review your goals and reset them. You create a new set of sub-goals 
and action plans.
Sometimes you achieve a goal and then you feel amazing. But 
most of  the time you don’t achieve them and you blame it on your-
self.
Here’s the  secret:  the  problem isn’t  you,  it’s the  system!  The 
goals system is a set up for failure.
Even  when  you  do  things exactly right,  it’s not ideal because 
goals limit your possibilities. When you don’t feel like doing some-
thing you have  to  force  yourself  to do it. Your  path  is chosen, so 
you  don’t have room to explore new territory. You have to follow 
the plan, even when you’re passionate about something else.
Some goal systems are more flexible, but nothing is as flexible 
as a life without goals.

LIVING WITHOUT GOALS
So what does a life without goals look like? In practice, it’s very 
different than one with goals.
You don’t set a goal for the year, nor for the month, nor for the 
week or  day. You don’t obsess about tracking, or actionable steps. 

You  don’t even  need  a  to-do  list, though  it doesn’t  hurt to  write 
down reminders if  you like.
What do you do, then? Lay around on the couch  all day? No, 
you find something you’re passionate about, and you do it. Just be-
cause you don’t have goals doesn’t mean you do nothing—you can 
create, you can produce, you can follow your passion.
And in practice, this is a wonderful thing: you wake up and do 
what you’re passionate about. For me, that’s usually writing, but it 
could  be  helping others or  connecting with  incredible  people  or 
spending time  with  my wife  or  playing with  my kids. There’s no 
limit, because I’m free.
In the end I usually achieve more than if  I had goals, because 
I’m  always  doing  something  I’m  excited  about.  But  whether  I 
achieve or not isn’t the point: all that matters is that I’m doing what 
I love, always.
I end  up  in  places that are  wonderful, surprising,  great. I just 
didn’t know I would get there when I started.
No matter what path you find, no matter where you end up, it’s 
beautiful. There is no bad path, no bad destination. It’s only different, and different is wonderful. Don’t judge. Just experience.
Always remember: the journey is all. The destination is beside 
the point.

--
Have No Expectations

How much  of  your  stress,  frustration,  disappointment,  anger, 
irritation, foul mood stems from one little thing?
Almost  all  of  it  comes  from  your  expectations,  and,  when 
things (inevitably) don’t turn out as we expect, from wishing things 
were different.
We build these expectations in our heads of  what other people 
should  do,  what our  lives should  be  like  or  look like,  how  other 
drivers should behave . . . and yet it’s all fantasy. It’s not real.
And when reality doesn’t meet our fantasy, we wish the  world 
were different.
Here’s a simple solution:
Take your expectations and throw them in the ocean.
Picture all the expectations you have for yourself, your life, your 
spouse, your kids, your coworkers, your job, the world. Take them 
from inside of  you and toss them in the ocean. A river or lake will 
also do.
What happens to them? They float. They’re carried around by 
waves. The current takes them out, and they drift away. Let them 
be washed away by the cleansing waters, and let them go.
Now live your life without them.
What’s a life without expectations like? You accept reality as it 
is, and  people  as they are,  without trying to force people into the 
containers that you  have created  for them. You  see things as they 
are. You don’t need to be disappointed or frustrated or angry—or if 
you are, you accept it, and then let it go.

That’s  not  to  say  that  you  never  act—you  can  act in  a  way 
that’s in accordance with your values and influence the world, but 
never have an expectation of  how the world will react to your actions.

If  you do something good, you won’t expect praise or appreciation. Let those  expectations of  reward and  praise float away with 
the waves. Do good because you love doing good, and expect nothing beyond that.
Pay attention to your  thoughts. Don’t beat yourself  up  if  you 
have expectations. Just see them. Then toss them in the ocean.
Notice if  you start to  wish  things weren’t the  way they are. If 
you wish someone else didn’t do something, notice that. You have 
expectations, and you wish  people  or the world  could  meet them 
instead  of  doing  what they actually  do.  Toss those  wishes in  the 
ocean too. Now accept things, and move on.
Let the waters of  the world cleanse us, and let us walk lightly in 
a world that is already wonderful without our fantasies.


--

The Illusion of  Control

When you think you control something, you’re wrong.
It’s amazing how often we think we’re in control of  something 
when really we aren’t.
Control is an illusion.
We constantly make plans that never actually turn out the way 
we envisioned. “If  you want to make God laugh, make plans,” an 
old saying goes.
We have been trained to set goals, and then work on the actions 
that lead to those goals . . . and yet how often  do we  fail to meet 
those  goals? How often  are  we  trying to control  a future  that we 
cannot predict?
Did you know ﬁve years ago that the world would turn out as it 
has—that Obama would be elected president, that the stock markets would  crash,  that we’d  be  deep  into a recession,  that earth-
quakes and  tsunamis would  hit, that you’d  be  doing exactly what 
you’re doing today?
Of  course not. We don’t know the future, much less are able to 
control it. We like  to  think we  do, but that never  turns out to be 
true.
And yet we  continue  to believe  in  the  illusion  of  control. We 
face a chaotic and complex world and seek to control it in whatever 
way we can.
Our attempts to control the world can be seen by these methods:
• Trying to  control  how  our  children  turn  out,  as if  we  can 
shape  them  like  blocks  of  clay,  as if  humans aren’t  more 
complex than we can possibly understand.
27• Tracking every little thing, from spending to exercise to what 
we eat to what tasks we do to how many visitors are  on our 
site  to  how  many  steps  we’ve  taken  today  and  how  many 
miles we’ve run. As if  our selective tracking can  possibly include the many complex factors that influence outcomes.
• Trying to control employees—again, complex human beings 
with many motivations and  whims and  habits that we don’t 
understand.
• Obsessively  planning  projects,  trips,  days,  parties,  as if  the 
outcomes of  events are  things that we can  control  with  our 
powers of  manipulation of  the world.
If  we can let go of  this illusion, what are we left with? How can 
we live among this chaos?
Consider the fish. A fish swims in a chaotic sea that it cannot 
possibly control—much as we all do. The  fish, unlike us, is under 
no illusion that it controls the sea, or other fish in the sea. The fish 
doesn’t even try to control where it ends up—it just swims, either 
going with the flow, or dealing with the flow as it comes. It eats and 
hides and mates, but does not try to control a thing.
We  are  no  better  than  that fish,  yet our  thinking  creates the 
need for an illusion.
Let go of  that thinking. Learn to be the fish.
When we are in the midst of  chaos, let go of  the need to control it. Be awash in it, experience it in that moment; try not to control the outcome but deal with the flow as it comes.
How do we  live our  lives like this?  It’s a completely different 
way of  living, once we let go of  the illusion:
• We stop setting goals, and instead do what excites us.
• We stop planning, and just do.
• We stop looking at the future, and live in the moment.
• We  stop  trying to control others, and focus instead on being 
kind to them and showing love.
• We learn that trusting our values is more important to taking 
action than desiring and striving for certain outcomes.
• We  take  each  step  lightly,  with  balance,  in  the  moment, 
guided  by  those  values  and  that  which  we  are  passionate 
about . . . rather than trying to plan the next 1,000 steps and 
where we’ll end up.
• We  learn to accept the world as it is,  rather  than  being annoyed with it, stressed by it, mad at it, despaired by it, or trying to change it into what we want it to be.
• We are never disappointed with how things turn out, because 
we never expected anything—we just accept what comes.
This might seem like  a passive way of  living to some, and  it’s 
against our aggressive, productive, goal-oriented cultural nature. If 
you  can’t accept this way of  living,  that’s OK—many people live 
their lives with the illusion of  control. Being ignorant about what it 
is that makes them unhappy or frustrated isn’t the worst thing ever.
But if  you  can learn to live this way . . . it’s the most freeing 
thing in the world.


--

Living with Chaos

We’ve  talked  about  letting  go  of  goals,  plans,  expectations. 
What I’m still learning is what to do if  you let go of  the illusion of 
control and plan as little as possible.
What’s life  like  without goals or  plans? How  do we deal with 
the chaos?
I don’t have all the answers, but I’m learning a lot.
I recently went to the World Domination Summit in  Portland 
with few plans. I had a speech to give, a couple smaller sessions to 
hold, a bike  tour scheduled, a plane  ticket and a hotel room. But 
the large majority of  the weekend I left open, with no plans.
It was liberating. I didn’t mind giving the talks, and I loved the 
tour,  but meeting  unexpected  strangers,  hanging out with  people 
I’d  never  met,  going  with  the  flow  of  the  crowd—it  was fun.  I 
never really knew what was going to happen next, and that’s scary . 
. . but strangely freeing.
I  also  recently went  to  Guam for  a  month,  and  had  tons of 
friends and family to see. But other than a place to stay, we had no 
set plans. We didn’t know what we would do for transportation, we 
didn’t know what we would do each day. It was scary, but we were 
fine.
How do you live with the chaos?
You learn to embrace it.

--
Living Daily Without Plans

I  try to schedule  as little  as possible, and  I  have  no goals for 
each day. I wake up and ask myself, “What excites me today?” And 
each day the answer is different.
Sure, there are obligations that I have to meet, but mostly those 
are things I’m excited  about. I’ll still do the things I’m not so ex-
cited about—unless I can avoid them.
But in each  moment I  try to  live  consciously, in  the moment, 
and ask myself  . . . “What am I passionate about? And how can I 
handle each moment while being true to my values?” It’s about being “mindful.” Most people don’t live in a state of  mindfulness.
My  value  is  compassion,  which  comes  in  various  manifestations:  love,  kindness,  empathy,  gratitude.  Every  time  a  situation 
comes up,  I  ask myself,  “How  can  I  deal  with  this compassionately?” This is a question more people should ask of  themselves.
I’m still learning how to do this. I don’t claim to have mastered 
it,  and  will  probably be exploring  the ways in  which  to do it for 
years to come. 


--
Why Plans are an Illusion

Living without plans might seem foolish or  unrealistic to most 
people. That’s fine. But if  you want to be realistic, you should understand that the plans you make are pure illusions of  control.
Let’s take a simple example. You have  plans to write a report 
(or a blog post or a book chapter) and then meet with a colleague 
or  business partner. The  writing is supposed  to  happen at 9  a.m. 
and the meeting is at 11 a.m.
Let’s assume  those  things actually  happen  according to  plan. 
Many days, other things come up and the illusion of  control is easily shattered.  But some  days we  get lucky and  our  plans actually 
happen as we had hoped.
So  you sit down to write, as planned. Perhaps you’ve outlined 
your  writing.  But  as  you  write,  you  think  of  things  you  hadn’t 
planned. You face problems you couldn’t have foreseen before you 
started writing. In fact, if  you pay close attention, it becomes clear 
that there’s no  way you could have planned  the writing ahead  of 
time—it has to  unfold  as you  do  it,  because  only as you  do  it do 
you fully think things through, and there’s no way to predict one’s 
own thinking (let alone the thinking of  others).
And so things emerge from our writing that could  never  have 
been  planned,  and,  in  fact,  if  we’re  open  to  it,  we  might  write 
something  entirely  brilliant  that  we  never  could  have  predicted. 
However, if  we try to stick to the outline, we might ignore the brilliant possibilities that arise.
So  now  it’s 11 a.m. and  it’s time  for  your  meeting.  You  meet 
your colleague or partner, as planned, and start talking. Of  course, 
conversations can’t be planned, and there’s no way to predict what 
will emerge as you talk. You might even have an agenda, but as you talk about things on the agenda, new ideas surface, and when one 
of  you suggests a new idea, that sparks another  idea in  the other 
person, and so on—ideas are sparked, back and forth, that couldn’t 
have been planned.
And so new ideas and projects and collaborations emerge from 
this meeting that never could have been planned. Which is a great 
thing.
The  two  planned  events,  even  though  they  happened  as 
planned, were totally unpredictable and uncontrollable. The more 
we embrace this chaos, the more we embrace the brilliant possibilities that might emerge. The more  we try to control our day and 
actions with plans, the more we limit ourselves.


--
Be Open to the Unfolding Moment

We  try to hold onto the illusion of  control, but what if  we in-
stead embraced the chaos? What if  we leave ourselves open to the 
changing, unfolding moment,  and the  possibilities we  could never 
plan for?
It’s beautiful.
Try it. Throw out your plans for the next hour. See what hap-
pens, moment to moment. Think about what excites you, what’s in 
line with your values.  Be intentional about this.
And as you start doing things that excite you, things that are in 
line  with your  values . .  . see  what new things emerge. Talk with 
people with no fixed intentions, and see what ideas arise from those 
interactions.  See  what  new  opportunities evolve  as  you  interact 
with people, with ideas, with your own thoughts.
It sounds nebulous, but in fact it’s as concrete as anything else. 
As I’ve shown, when we make plans, we think we’re setting things 
in concrete, but life  is always fluid—we just try to make ourselves 
believe that it’s solidly concrete.
When we acknowledge the fluidity of  our lives, we learn to use 
that fluidity to our  advantage. We flow. We are  open  to changing 
currents. We see  things with open eyes, instead of  trying to make 
the world adjust to our plans and goals.
I don’t have all the answers, and, in fact, I’d be a hypocrite if  I 
claimed to be able to predict what will happen when I live like this . 
. . or if  anyone else lives like this.
I don’t know what will happen. Think of  the limitless possibilities of  that simple statement.


--
Don’t Create False Needs

Our  lives are  filled  with  things that we  need  to  do.  Until  we 
look a little more closely at those needs.
Think  about  what needs you  might  have:  the  need  to  check 
your email every 15 minutes, or empty your inbox, or read all your 
blogs,  or  keep something perfectly neat,  or  dress for  work in  the 
latest  fashion.  The  need  to  constantly  badger  your  kids  about 
things, or control your coworkers, or meet with anyone who wants 
a meeting, or have more and more money, or own a nice car.
Where do these types of  needs come from? They’re completely 
made up.
Sometimes the needs are created by society: the industry you’re 
in requires you to work until 9 p.m. or dress in flawless suits. Your 
neighborhood has certain  standards and if  you don’t have an impeccable lawn and two BMWs in the driveway, you’ll be judged. If 
you don’t have the latest iPhone, you won’t have your geek cred or 
status symbol, and you’ll be jealous of  those who do.
Sometimes the needs are invented by ourselves: we feel the urge 
to check our emails or RSS feeds or news websites or text messages 
or Twitter  accounts constantly,  even  though there are no negative 
societal or  work consequences if  we don’t keep up with them. We 
want a perfectly made-up bed even if no one else cares. We want to 
create a list of  goals in life, or for the year, and achieve every one of 
them, even if  nothing bad will happen if  we don’t achieve most of 
them.
Any of  these  made-up needs can  be  eliminated. All it takes is 
the willingness to let go.
Examine one of  your made-up needs, and ask yourself  why it’s 
such an important need. Ask what would happen if  you dropped it. 

What good would it do? Would you have more free time and more 
space to concentrate and  create, or less stress and  fewer things to 
check off  each  day?  What bad  things would  happen—or  might 
happen? And how likely is it that these things would happen? And 
how could you counteract them?
These needs are created by fears, and the more honest we are 
about these fears, the better. Face the fears, and give yourself  a little 
trial period—allow  yourself  to let go  of  the  need, but just for  an 
hour, or a day. Just for a week. If  nothing bad happens, extend the 
trial, and, slowly in this manner, you’ll ﬁnd that the need wasn’t a 
need at all.
It  can  feel good  to  let go,  and  by  letting  go,  you  are  freeing 
yourself.

--

Be Passionate & Do Nothing You Hate Doing

How much of  our days are spent doing things we  dislike? It’s 
been  ingrained  in  us that  we  must  do  things we  don’t  like  doing—that these  things necessary,  that it’s a virtue  to  do things we 
dislike doing. I disagree. 
If  you hate doing something, figure out a way to stop doing it. 
This can sometimes be very easy, but other times it means eventually making a drastic life change. Whether you make that change is 
up to you. 
Sometimes I  can  just  stop  doing something,  other  times I’ve 
had to let go of  something I really thought was necessary (my job, 
living in  Guam, etc.). And each time  that I’ve dropped the odious 
task, I’ve felt freer.
I’ve quit several jobs that I hated. I dislike driving, so I moved 
to San Francisco, and now my wife and six kids and I are car-free. I 
don’t  like  budgeting,  so  I  automated  my  finances.  I  got  tired  of 
moderating  comments,  so  I  removed  them.  I  didn’t  like  dealing 
with advertisers, so I removed ads from my site. When I’m reading 
a book that bores me, I  choose another. I automate or remove repetitive, boring tasks from my life. 
Dropping the things I hate frees me up to do the things I love. 
Now I only do things I’m passionate about. If  I start to hate a project, I’ll drop it. That might mean I don’t finish everything I start, 
but finishing what we start is a false need—in my experiments, I’ve 
found that doing what we love is a much better method.
38I spend time with the people I love most. I read, and run, and 
write. I help others, and find time for solitude. These are the things 
I love, and my life is filled with them.
I apply the same ideas to health and fitness: I find  the healthy 
foods I love,  and eat those. I  find ways to  play,  and so  I’m active 
and  fit doing things I  love—running  and  jumping and  throwing 
things around and playing with my kids and climbing and sprinting 
up hills and swimming and playing basketball. I get fit doing what I 
love doing, and it is effortless.
How  much  more  skillful,  soulful,  and  useful  could  your  best 
work get if  you didn’t spend so much energy pushing yourself  into 
doing stuff  you hate? 

--
Don’t Rush, Go Slowly & Be Present

Don’t rush.  Go  slowly. Be present.  Rushing through  our  days 
causes difficulties and extra effort.
We  tend  to  rush  around,  doing  everything  quickly,  piling  as 
many tasks into our days as humanly possible. That means we have 
little  down  time,  little  space  between  tasks and  events,  little  rest. 
And it means we  are  very rarely present as we  do  things,  which 
means we’re not enjoying life, or food, or people.
It also means we’re causing unnecessary problems. Rushing of-
ten  leads  to  accidents—driving  fast,  for  example,  is the  biggest 
cause of  auto accidents. Rushing around a workplace leads to accidents. Rushing through a task leads to mistakes. We aren’t mindful 
as we’re rushing, which means we  miss things, we don’t see problems as they’re approaching, we harm ourselves and others.
Rushing makes everyone else  around us more stressed as well. 
When I try to rush my family out the door so we won’t be late, my 
wife  (who takes her  time getting ready for  anything) gets stressed 
out because I’m rushing her. When we rush around the office doing 
things, it makes our coworkers feel more rushed themselves. It adds 
an extra, unnecessary pressure to every event in our lives.
Instead, try going slowly. This is the true tempo of  an effortless 
life, and, ironically,  it isn’t easy for  many people.  Walking slowly 
between two things in  the office, or  in the home, is a foreign  concept for most of  us.
Try  eating  more  slowly.  Try  doing  nothing  but  eating—no 
reading or  Internet browsing  or  watching television  or  talking to 
others. This is hard if  you’re not used to it. But the result is that we become  more  mindful  of  our  food—the  taste  and  texture  of  it, 
where it came from, how much we eat, how full we are. It’s a good 
way to lose weight, to be grateful for what you have, to fully appreciate the food you’re eating.
Try driving more slowly. You’ll be safer, cause less harm, be less 
stressed, enjoy your drive more.
Living a slower  life  means removing unnecessary goals, plans, 
actions,  so  that you  have  more  breathing  room. This subtraction 
can take time. Feel free to subtract slowly.

--
Create No Unnecessary Actions

Much  of  what we  do is unnecessary. That’s a bold statement, 
but one that I’ve found true from observation.
Consider  Masanobu  Fukuoka,  the  revolutionary  Japanese 
farmer  I  mentioned  in  the  earlier  chapter,  “True  Needs,  Simple 
Needs.” He studied traditional and modern farming, and after long 
and  careful  observation  concluded  that  most  of  what  farmers 
(modern or  traditional) do is unnecessary: plowing and tilling and 
weeding  and  fertilizing  and  pruning  and  using  pesticides.  He 
stripped  away these  unnecessary actions and  was left  with  much 
less that needed to be done.
The same principle applies to everything we do. Much of  what 
we do is only done because of  custom, because we think it’s necessary,  or  because  we’ve  created  the  need  for  the  actions  through 
problems caused  by  other  actions we’ve  taken.  By  giving careful 
consideration  to each  action  we take, we can  start to refrain  from 
unnecessary actions.
You’ll want specifics,  not just generalities.    So,  here are  some 
examples:
• Responding to every email or Facebook message or  tweet is 
unnecessary. We  feel the  urge to do so, perhaps, because  we 
don’t want to be rude; but I’ve found that few people are truly 
offended if  I don’t reply. figure out what replies are the most 
essential, and do those.
• We  create  unnecessary cleaning and  maintenance  when  we 
bring too many possessions into our lives. By removing those 
unnecessary possessions (de-cluttering) and not bringing more 
into  our  lives,  we  have  less  cleaning  and  maintaining  and 
storing to do.
• As parents, we tend to do too much for and with our kids. In 
truth, we can teach our kids to be fairly self-sufficient, and we 
can  give  them space  to  play and create  without needing  us 
(and electronics) to fill every single minute of  their days. And 
so, by subtracting parenting actions, we can do less, but give 
the kids more room to grow and learn on their own.
• Yard  work  can  become  unnecessary  if  you  let  wild  plants 
grow naturally and sow veggies among the weeds. Sure, that’s 
not in keeping with neighborhood norms, but it’s an example 
of  how we can change the way things are done.
• If  you shave your head, there’s a whole host of  hair maintenance actions that can be eliminated.
• If  you  can  work  from  home,  or  live  near  your  work,  you 
eliminate commuting.
• If  you remove  comments from your  blog, you don’t need to 
moderate comments.
There are countless examples, of  course, but the guiding principle of  “do nothing unnecessary” is one to keep in mind as you go 
about your day.

--
Find Contentment

Almost everyone I know is looking for something better, all the 
time.
They want a better life, better clothes, a better car, a better job, 
a better place  to live. And  I understand this, because I was there 
most of  my life.
It wasn’t until I learned to find contentedness, slowly, that I was 
actually able to improve my life:
• By realizing that spending  time  with  my wife,  my kids,  and 
myself  was all I needed, I no longer needed entertainment or 
shopping. I spent less and got out of  debt.
• By  learning  to  be  content with  homemade  food,  I  stopped 
needing to eat out all the time (although I still do on a semi-
regular basis) and I lost weight.
• By learning to explore and be amazed by all that was around 
me,  I  stopped  needing  to  drive  so  much,  and  have  now 
ditched  my car. I contribute  less to global warming, and  am 
getting pretty fit from all the walking and biking.
• Most of  all, I stopped the  endless cycle  of  wanting more, of 
wanting better, and I realized I already had everything. I’m so 
much happier now.
finding  contentment  isn’t  something  that  usually  happens 
overnight, but rather  comes in small doses. Here are  some  things 
you can do today to learn to find that contentedness:
• Look around you right now, or perhaps when you’re sitting at 
home. Realize that everything around you is all that you need 
for happiness. What do you need to be happy? Food, shelter, 
clothing,  other  people,  something  meaningful  to  do,  and  a 
mindset of  contentedness.
• Want something meaningful to do? You don’t need to change 
jobs—just help others, in any way you can. Help coworkers to 
succeed. Be there for friends when they need you. Spend time 
with loved ones and  encourage them.  Volunteer to help  the 
needy. Improve your community in small ways.
• Need others in your life? find a neighbor and make a friend. 
Volunteer and be friendly. Hang out with coworkers. Be considerate, friendly, positive in all human transactions.
• Start counting  your  blessings—all  the  things for  which  you 
have to be grateful.
• When you find  yourself  thinking about what you want, start 
appreciating what you have, every day.
• Be  more  mindful  in  everything you  do—eating,  showering, 
walking,  working,  washing  dishes,  talking,  writing,  reading 
and spending time with others.
• Improve  your  capacity of  mindfulness through  daily  sitting 
meditation.
When  you  find  contentment, you  realize  you  need  very little, 
and little needs to be done. Life becomes easier, and better.

--
Let Go of  Success & the Need for Approval

Laozi said:
Success is as dangerous as failure.
Hope is as hollow as fear.
What does it mean that success is as dangerous as failure?
Whether you go up the ladder or down it,
your position is shaky.
When you stand with your two feet on the 
ground,
you will always keep your balance.
Success is something that’s ingrained in  us from birth, and  almost every moment of  our childhood and schooling are geared to-
wards the  idea of  success. But it’s a hollow concept.  Who  defines 
success?  Why  is  it  so  important?  What  happens when  we  don’t 
achieve it? And what happens when we do, and still want more, or 
realize  it wasn’t  worth  all  the  effort,  and  that  we’ve  wasted  our 
lives?
The need for success, and to be seen as an achiever, drives us to 
do  so  much  that’s unnecessary.  We  strive  for  a  nice  house,  car, 
clothes, gadgets, traveling the world, a prestigious job, a list of  accomplishments, a flock of  online followers. To what end? To look 
good in the eyes of  the world, when in truth the rest of  the people 
in the world are worried about themselves.

Let go of  the  need for  success, of  the need for  approval from 
others. We want to look good to our peers, sure, but relinquish this 
as a driving force in our lives. 
Keep your feet on the ground. find balance, find contentment. 
Forget about “success.”


--
Prefer Subtraction
We  seem to  have a natural instinct to  add things to  our  lives. 
We  want to  achieve  more, do more, find  new  hobbies, make new 
friends, acquire more.
But every single thing added to our lives requires new efforts. 
One by one we add new things and don’t account for all the maintenance required for each new thing, friend, hobby and goal. Soon 
we become overwhelmed, and we don’t know how to cut back.
A  general  guideline  is  to  be  very  careful  about  adding  new 
things to your life, and, in general, favor the subtraction of  things.
When  a  new  online  social  network  comes out,  be  careful  in 
your  choice to add, and  prefer the removal of  online activities in-
stead.
Be  careful about adding new friends, new projects, new commitments. Prefer to get out of  commitments that aren’t enhancing 
your life, but rather complicating it.
Subtraction  is a  careful  process  and  it  takes  time.  Addition 
tends to be mindless—it’s easy to say yes without fully scrutinizing 
all the  ramification it  will have  on  our  lives. So  take  care  when 
considering something new, and slowly remove things when possible.
Be a curator of  your life. Slowly cut things out until you’re left 
only with  what you love,  with what’s necessary,  with  what makes 
you happy.

--
Changing Your Mindset & Getting Rid of  Guilt

When people first hear of  effortlessness, of  giving up goals and 
expectations, of  surrendering control, of  doing less . . . they often 
have negative thoughts.
It’s against our cultural norms to do less—it’s considered lazy. 
We don’t like to be passive, it’s not an empowering word. We want 
to  work  harder, not merely sail  through  life.  We  want to achieve 
more goals, not give them up.
That’s the mindset we’ve been trained to have, but it’s not necessarily better. It’s the mindset I had for many years, and, through 
my experiments,  I’ve  found the  effortless life  to be more  natural, 
more satisfying. I’m much more content these days.
If  you find yourself  having a negative reaction to any of  these 
ideas,  that’s  OK.  Pay  attention  to  those  thoughts.  Then  ask  if 
you’re right, or if  it’s possible that this way might work as well, or 
better. If  you only think you know but don’t have factual evidence, 
get the factual evidence by experimenting.
When we start to do less, and do it with less effort and more 
fluidity, we might feel guilty at first. But as we see the results of  this 
crazy experiment,  we  start to  feel better  about it because  we  see 
that doing less is not so bad.  The changed life is not a matter  of 
laziness, but of  living more naturally and mindfully with more contentment.
That’s a good life. Instead  of  rejecting your old ideas, you are 
giving yourself  permission to lead a better life—the Effortless Life.

--
Be Like Water

Bruce Lee taught us the lesson of  fluidity:
Be like water making its way through cracks. 
Do not be assertive, but adjust to the object, 
and you shall find a way round or through it. 
If  nothing within you stays rigid, outward 
things will disclose themselves.
Empty your mind, be formless, shape-
less—like water. Now you put water in a cup, 
it becomes the cup; You put water into a 
bottle it becomes the bottle; You put it in a 
teapot it becomes the teapot. Now water can 
flow or it can crash. Be water, my friend.
In  practice, this means letting go of  fixed  plans and  routes. It 
means not having expectations of  what a situation will be, or what 
its  outcome  will  be.  It  means remaining  flexible  so  that  we  can 
adapt our actions—or non-actions—to the ever-changing situation, 
the unfolding moment.
When we fix on one path or goal, we lose flexibility and adapt-
ability, because we want to go to one specific place using one specific  path. But what if  things change? It’s hard to  adapt if  we’re 
fixed and rigid; but if  we have nothing fixed in stone, we can adapt 
to the changes easily.
What happens when your plans get messed up? Do you get up-
set? If  you learn to give up expected outcomes, and let go of  wishing  that  things were  different,  you  won’t get upset.  You’ll  adapt. 
You’ll flow.
This opens us up to possibility. With no fixed path, we are free 
to take any turn, any opportunity, any whim, any door that opens up when we least expect it. It’s impossible to predict the future accurately, so how can we know how things will unfold? If  we don’t 
know how things will unfold, how can  we  set a fixed  path in  advance? By leaving yourself  fluid, you allow yourself  to see things as 
they change, adapt with balance, learn as things happen, and use 
this new information to change your course intelligently and intuitively.


--
Equal Weight to Every Action

A Zen monk and friend of  mine, Susan O’Connell, taught me 
something important recently.  Susan  is Vice President of  the San 
Francisco Zen Center and a movie and TV actress in a former life.
She gave a talk about how she goes through her day, and it was 
enlightening. I’ve since put her ideas into practice.
Susan says she gives equal weight to every action, to every moment. We  tend to do the opposite:  certain things we  do are  more 
important than others and so we mentally focus on those and give 
little thought to the smaller things.
Susan  gives equal weight to meditating, working on an important project, talking with a stranger, walking to her car in the parking lot, eating a bowl of  soup.  None  is more important than  the 
other. Even the space between things is given equal weight.
The spaces between things: when we move from email to talking to a co-worker, that is a space between things. When we move 
from eating to putting our dish in the sink, that’s a space between. 
And we tend to barely register these spaces on our consciousness.
Imagine  giving  these  spaces  the  same  weight  as  you  would 
something more “important”. What would  a day filled with these 
important spaces be like? In  my experience, it means we’re  more 
mindful, that we have a slower and more evenly paced day, that we 
are calmer and more at peace. It means less stress, and less effort.
Try it for  an  hour. Every single thing you  do  should  be  done 
mindfully,  and  given  equal importance  —  whether  that’s putting 
something away, walking from one spot to another, picking up the 
phone, or talking to someone.

It also means that things we tend to overemphasize — perhaps 
over-dramatize — are less emphasized. This tends to mean  fewer 
unnecessary emotions are  invested  in  things that  aren’t that dramatic in the first place. We tend to lose perspective sometimes, but 
if  we give equal weight to everything, it’s easier to keep perspective 
and not lose our cool.
As with  any of  these ideas,  I’m still learning this one, but it’s 
been useful to me. I hope it will help you too, and  if  it does, give 
thanks to Susan.

--
Eating Simply

I've been slowly getting healthier, fitter, leaner, happier using a 
very simple  diet — though I give myself  a lot of  latitude and  am 
not strict at all.
WHAT I EAT
I  generally  (though  not  strictly)  eat whole,  real,  unprocessed 
plant foods. Some combination of  these things:
• Lots of  veggies, especially dark green leafy ones
• Beans (including soybeans)
• Nuts & seeds (almonds, walnuts, flax seeds, quinoa, etc)
• Whole grains like steel-cut oats, brown rice
• Fruits with abandon
• Wine, coffee, tea
I'll also eat minimally processed foods like olive oil, nut butters, 
tofu, vinegar, etc.
I  love  avocados,  black  beans,  almonds,  lentils,  coconut  milk, 
berries, sweet potatoes, sprouted grains.
I'll eat veggie chili, stir-fried tofu & veggies with quinoa, black 
beans with tahini sauce on brown rice with kale, steel-cut oats with 
raw almonds & berries & ground flax seeds & cinnamon, things like 
that.

WHAT I EAT LESS OF
The only thing I've  cut out completely is meat and other animal products. But there are some things I eat less of  than before:
• Sweets
• Processed grains
• Sugary beverages
• Fried foods
I  indulge  in  these  things  sometimes,  but  only  in  modest 
amounts.

WHY I CUT OUT ANIMAL PRODUCTS
I didn't stop eating meat, dairy, or eggs for health  reasons. It's 
for  ethical reasons. I  see no reason we should  willingly cause  the 
suffering and mass killing of  millions of  innocent feeling, suffering 
beings just for our pleasure (it tastes good).
Sure, you can say that fish or yogurt are healthy, but the fact is, 
we can eat a healthy diet without them (as I've shown here). And so 
the  only real  reason  to  eat animals is for pleasure, and that's not 
something I can feel good about. I don't judge those who do it, but 
I personally don't want to be a part of  it.

CONCLUSIONS
This isn't a difficult diet. It's fairly cheap, it's packed with dense 
nutrition, it's not hard to prepare, it's delicious.
And  it's  healthy.  You  can  eat  simple,  unprocessed  foods,  all 
plants,  and  be  incredibly  healthy.  And  you  don't  have  to  stress 
about  it  or  be  disciplined  —  just enjoy this  diet,  and  enjoy  less 
healthy foods on occasion in moderation.
I  found that when I cut out the  animal-related foods, my enjoyment of  the other foods I continued to eat increased. So did my 
energy level.

SOME RECIPES
I know people will ask for  recipes, so here are  a few I've published before:
• Steel-Cut Oats: 
http://zenhabits.posterous.com/my-favorite-healthy-breakfast
• Scrambled Tofu: 
http://zenhabits.posterous.com/leos-healthy-scrambled-tofu
• Veggie Chili: 
http://zenhabits.net/health-tip-try-eating-vegetarian/
• Tahini sauce goes with beans, kale, brown rice (not my recipe): 
http://www.livestrong.com/recipes/i-am-attentive-spice-tahini-saue/


--
Effortless Parenting

For  those  of  us  with  children,  parenting  is  often  one  of  the 
most “effortful” things we do. Parenting isn’t easy, and I’m not going to write a chapter here pretending that it is.
I have found that through subtraction, parenting can be easier 
than most of  us are used to.
Consider  some  of  the  normal  ways we  parent,  and  how  the 
principles of  this book can help subtract those efforts:
• Many  of  us over  schedule  our  children:  they  have  school 
events and schoolwork, but also a variety of  other activities: 
sports,  dance  classes,  music  classes,  summer  camps,  play 
dates,  birthday parties,  and  much  more.  The  kids are  endlessly busy, and so are we. What if  we had them do less, and 
cope  with  boredom, and  find  ways to  entertain  themselves? 
We’d have less to do as parents.
• Many of  us stress over clean houses and clean rooms. What if 
we gave  up expectations of  our kids’ rooms, and instead just 
tried to set a good example and forgot about whether our kids 
are  actually  learning  from  that  example?  We’d  be  less 
stressed.
• Many of  us are worried about our kids’ success, and so we do 
so  much  to  give  them  the  best foundation  for  success.  But 
what if  we gave up expectations and hopes for what our kids 
might do, how they might turn out? And instead, what if  we 
just accepted whatever they decide to do with their lives?
• We often expect our kids to be ideal kids, on their best behavior, and they almost never live up to that (or they get incredibly stressed  out trying to live  up  to  that). We  spend  a lot of 
our time trying to get our kids to conform to the standards we 
set for them. What if  we gave up our expectations of  our kids 
and how they should behave, and instead accepted them for 
who they are?
• We  have a set idea for  what our kids should learn, and how 
they should be educated. I’ve found that most of  my old ideas 
about school  were  wrong, and  now  Eva and I  un-school our 
kids. We let go of  the traditional top-down model of learning, 
and  instead allow them to  learn  based  on  their  interests (so 
they actually want to learn), allow  them to teach themselves 
(so they can teach themselves into adulthood), allow them to 
learn  to solve problems (so they can  solve  any problem, and 
not just memorize  useless fact). In  short,  they learn  how  we 
learn  as adults,  which  is based on  what we’re  interested in. 
And as a result, I have much less to do when it comes to education, because  really all they need to know is how to teach 
themselves and how to solve problems.

I haven’t learned all these lessons fully myself. These are things 
I’m experimenting with, but so far the results have been incredible.
I’ve learned that there is very little we need to do as parents — 
mostly we  should  just try to  keep  them  alive  and  keep  ourselves 
from screwing them up.
Like Masanobu Fukuoka and his theories of  “natural farming,” 
I’m finding that the least amount of  intervention as a parent is the 
best amount. The less we do as parents, the better.
That doesn’t mean I ignore  them. Not at all: instead, I  spend 
time with them, but it’s unstructured time with no expectations of 
the kids. I set an example, with no expectation that they’ll act exactly as I do or as I hope. I love them, unconditionally, no matter 
how they behave. I let them grow and learn on their own, with lit-
58tle intervention or desired  outcomes. They’re better off  for it, I’ve 
been finding.

--
Effortless Relationships

Relationships are  possibly the  most complicated  things in  our 
lives. From long-standing battles with  co-workers to the history of 
scars and joys we have with our significant others to the frustrations 
and miracles of  parenting, every relationship becomes a multitude 
of  layers of  meaning and past actions and the emotions that result 
from those actions.
How can we simplify those relationships? By learning to be present, and forget about past injustices. By giving up our complicated 
expectations of  the people we  live  and work with, and  simply accepting them for who they are.
You can wake up and still be mad at your wife for an imagined 
slight from the night before, or you can wake up and see her beautiful face and appreciate her  for the wonder  she is. Those past in-
justices only live on if  we dwell in the past. If  we learn to live in the 
present  moment,  they  disappear,  because  all  we  have  is what  is 
happening right now: another person, breathing like we are, wanting to be loved like we do.
Practice being present in your next interaction with a friend or 
loved one. Don’t worry about what has happened before, or what 
will happen  later. Just enjoy being with that person, pay full attention to that person, and be grateful you are in their presence.
Practice  letting  go of  expectations of  other  people.  It’s these 
expectations that cause  us to be  frustrated  and  angry and  disappointed. When your co-worker  pisses you off, it’s because you expect them to be better, to be different. They aren’t. They’re exactly 
how they are, and wishing they were different will get you nothing 
but frustration. So accept how they are, and work within that reality.

That  doesn’t mean  you  have  to  take  crap  from everybody.  It 
means that in your mind, you don’t wish people were different and 
weren’t rude. Instead, you deal with  that rudeness evenly and appropriately, and perhaps even learn about humanity in the process.
Letting go of  expectations can be extremely difficult. It first entails mindfulness —  the  realization  that  we  have  expectations of 
people, and that these expectations are causing frustration. That’s a 
tough first step, but letting go of  the expectations is even tougher. It 
means taking a deep breath, and saying, “This is the way the world 
is right now, and it is perfect.”
And  those  expectations,  and  resulting  frustrations,  are  every-
where. When we get mad at other drivers in traffic, it’s because we 
expect them to drive  a certain way, when  the reality is, there  will 
always be rude  drivers. Expecting different is useless. When we’re 
in line and the person serving the line is slow, we expect them to be 
faster, and it makes us angry. When our child misbehaves,  we expect them to act perfectly. When our friend doesn’t show up for a 
date, we expect them to be better.
Those expectations serve no purpose but to cause us grief. Let-
ting go of  them simplifies every relationship.

--
Effortless Work

Work can be play, and when it is, it's virtually effortless.
Take the writing of  this book. I decided to do it for fun, to explore  some  of  the  ideas  I've  been  practicing  lately,  to  see  what 
would  happen  if  I  did  it  publicly  and  opened  the  doors  to  the 
world. And I had a ton of  fun doing it. As a result, I've written this 
book faster than  any other book,  and the  writing has been easier 
than ever.
Some ideas for turning work into effortless play:
• Do what excites you. When you do drudgery, it's hard to have 
fun doing it.
• Make  it social.  Work  with  someone  you  like,  or  make  it a 
group project, or get an accountability partner.
• Post your progress online. This won't work for every project, 
but it can be fun to share what you've been doing with others, 
and to get feedback daily.
• Do it in small bursts. As an example, I've kept the chapters of 
this book very short.  I can  write them in  one sitting, and in 
fact I  can usually write  several chapters in  one sitting. That 
means writing a chapter is never very hard, and I don't have 
to  force  myself  through  an  intimidating  amount  of  boring 
work. If  a project is too large, break it into smaller chunks.
• Make it a competition. Creating a challenge between two or 
more people  can add  a lot of  fun  to any job.  I love  playing 
basketball, for example, and so I can play for a couple hours 
and it doesn't feel like exercise — it's just a game.
• Walk away if  it's boring. You never force yourself  to play, and 
if  you get tired of  playing, you walk away. Any work should 
be the same way: if  you're tired of  the work, walk away. You 
can always come back later.
Of  course,  this assumes you  have  a  decent degree  of  control 
over your work. Sometimes you aren't as lucky, but you can still focus on the parts of  the work that are fun, and turn the boring bits 
into little games — how many words can you write in 10 minutes, 
or how many customers can you send away with a smile?
If  you hate your job — maybe it won't allow you to play effortlessly every day — realize that you can change it. We are not stuck 
in our jobs. I felt like I was, more than once, because my family re-
lied on my income. But I changed, by looking for other opportunities, by putting feelers out, by exploring things that really interested 
me.
find  something  you  love  doing,  that  feels like  play,  and  turn 
that into your job. That means you have to get really good at it — 
once you're  really good, people  will  pay you.  So play at the  job, 
perhaps on the side of  your day job, and keep playing until you get 
good at it. The only way to get better is to do it.
find  a way to  make  a living doing it, once you're  good  at it. 
find a way to help people by doing what you love doing. That can 
take some  creative  thinking,  but often  it just takes a few  Internet 
searches before you find others who are doing what you love doing, 
and making money at it.
No matter what your  job, you can  find a way to make  it play. 
It's all a matter of  mindset. And once it's play, it's effortless.

--
Turning Complaints Into Gratitude

A life full of  complaints isn’t effortless. It’s a constant struggle, 
because everything in life is horrible. But a simple switch in mind-
set can change everything.
Take your biggest complaint today. Now try to find a way to be 
grateful for that complaint.
A few examples:
• I hurt my elbow playing basketball. But how lucky I am to be 
able to lead such an active life!
• My boss has been obnoxious all day. I’m thankful for the opportunity to practice  patience, to be present,  to  learn  about 
humanity, to be alive.
• I lost my job today. And thus I’m free to explore all the scary 
job paths I’ve never had the time to pursue before.
It’s transformative.  You go from hating the world  to loving it. 
You stop  wishing you  had things you don’t, and start appreciating 
what you do have.
Turning a complaint into gratitude is a simple process:
1. You have to first notice that you’re complaining. Be mindful 
of  your thoughts, of  your negative self-talk.
2. Notice  also  that  you’re  wishing  things  were  different  than 
they are. Which is a futile activity, if  you think about it.
3. Now  accept  things as they are.  Be  OK  that  the  world  has 
turned  out exactly as it is. And note  that the world will go on, 
whether you’re OK with it or not.
4. Now  be  grateful  you  have  the  opportunity to  even  make  a 
complaint. Being alive is a miracle. find a way to see the silver 
lining,  because  everything  has a positive  side  if  you  look hard 
enough.
Doing this once is a great pick-me-up. But doing it daily, even 
all day long, can change your life. Soon you’ll have no complaints, 
and go through life happier than ever.


--
Letting Go of  Struggle

Our lives aren’t effortless because we struggle through so much. 
But the struggle is entirely invented, lives entirely in our minds.
We  invent  this  struggle  for  many  reasons:  to  give  our  lives 
meaning, to give ourselves a feeling of  accomplishment, to dramatize our story (even  if  only in our  own heads), or simply because 
this is the mode of  thinking we’ve become used to.
Giving  up  the  struggle  isn’t  always  easy,  but  it  is  liberating. 
When  you  realize  you  don’t have  to  struggle  with  everything, life 
becomes so much more effortless.
Take the example of struggling with your young child when she 
won’t eat  her  vegetables.  This struggle  is unnecessary — forcing 
her to eat the vegetables accomplishes nothing. The child won’t like 
vegetables more because she’s forced to eat them. Instead, set the 
example of  eating vegetables yourself, and find ways to make eating healthy foods fun  for  her. By making it fun, and  letting go  of 
the need to force her to eat veggies, you’ve  let go of  the unnecessary struggle.
The same applies to any struggle where we have expectations of 
others — let go of  those expectations, and stop trying to force people  to conform to the  expectations.  Those  are  an  imagined  ideal 
anyway.  Instead,  motivate  through  inspiration,  make  things  fun, 
and  focus on  what’s  important:  the  relationship.  The  struggle  is 
never as important as the relationship.
Struggle  comes when  we  try  to  force  things down  a  certain 
path. Instead, flow around the obstacle like water, finding an alternate path, letting go of  the fixed path. Adapt, be fluid, and accept 
the changing course.

--
Dealing With Others

One  of  the most difficult questions for  anyone trying to make 
changes in  their  lives is: What if  others in  my life don’t want to 
simplify?
It’s an amazingly common problem, and one that doesn’t have 
an easy answer.
However, there are things you can do if  your significant other, 
family  members,  friends,  co-workers  or  others  in  your  life  are 
standing in the way of  finding simplicity.
I’m lucky in that my wife, Eva, is incredibly supportive and in 
fact has joined me in my journey to simplify. She has eliminated a 
lot of her stuff, has streamlined her life, and while she’s not quite as 
minimalist as I am (who can blame her?), she’s come an amazingly 
long way and I’m proud of  her.
But that didn’t happen by accident — I engaged Eva’s participation from the beginning, got her on my side, and didn’t push or 
try to force her to do anything (well, usually — I don’t claim to be 
perfect). And of  course, what’s most important is that she genuinely 
wants me to be happy and to succeed in anything I do. Again, I’m 
really lucky.
I’ve had success in getting my kids on board, at least a little bit, 
with a lot of  what I  do, and  I’ve also had  success in  letting them 
live  their  lives differently  than  I  lead  mine.  I’ve  also  had  to  deal 
with other family members and people in my life who haven’t been 
so supportive — in a few cases, actively against some of  the things 
we’ve tried to do.

A SIMPLE METHOD
How  have  I  dealt  with  all of  this?  I’d  like  to  share  some  of 
what’s worked for me, in hopes that it’ll help some of  you. As al-
ways, your mileage will vary.
1.  Model behavior.  The  most important thing  you  can  do to 
convert others to your ideas is to be the best model possible. Walk 
the walk, and do it visibly, so others can see what you’re doing. This 
goes for  your  spouse,  for your kids, for  family and  friends, for  co-
workers. Just showing how to do it can  be a powerful tool indeed. 
De-clutter your life, live more simply, and  you’ll go a long way to 
converting others.
2. Share  how  important it is to  you,  and  the benefits. This is 
really the second part of  being a role model: as you start to live the 
simple life, show others how great it is to you, how important a part 
of  your  life  this is.  Talk  with  them  about  it,  and  tell  them why 
you’re  doing this. When people understand your motivation, they 
can start to get on board, or at least stop feeling so threatened. And 
when they see how great it is for you, how happy it makes you and 
all the  great things it brings into your life, they’ll move closer  and 
closer to your way.
3. Ask for help. One of  the first things I did with Eva was ask 
for her support. Not just her consent, but her physical help. I con-
fessed that I can’t do it on my own and I need her. Many people, if 
they truly care about you, want to help you. They want you to be 
happy, and if  you tell them how they can help you succeed, they’ll 
do their best. If  possible, make simplifying a team effort — not just 
something you’re  doing,  but something you’re  all  doing together. 
And make it fun!
4. Educate. The best way to educate others is, as I said above, 
by your  good  example. But beyond  that,  you  may  want to share 
books and websites and blogs you’re reading, not in a way that insists that they change,  but just to  show  what you’re  interested  in and how they might learn more if  they’re  interested. Documentaries,  podcasts, magazines,  and  other  good sources of  information 
are helpful as well. You can’t force people to read or watch, but you 
can make it available. In addition, talk with them about it — again, 
not in  a pushy way but in  a way that shows how  excited  you  are 
and  how  you’d  like  to share  what you’re  learning  about.  If  they 
seem put off, don’t drone on and on.
5. Help them succeed. If  you do have some success converting 
some of  the important people in your life to your way of  thinking, 
at least to a minor degree, don’t criticize when they don’t do it as 
well as you’d like, or to the extent you’d like. Instead, be encouraging, be  happy  for  them,  and  support them in  any way you  can. 
Again, make it a team effort.
6. Realize you can’t control or change others. One of  the most 
common  frustrations comes when people try to control other  people, or  force  them to change.  It’s a recipe that control others, but there 
will always be a struggle, and you’ll always fail to some degree. This 
applies to  your  significant other,  even  to  kids.  We  try  to  control 
them but we  can’t, not really. Instead, try to  influence  others, en-
courage them, support them, help them find happiness. And let go 
of  the need to control. It’s difficult but really essential here. Once 
you can release that need to control, you’ll find much more happiness.
7. Set boundaries. Once you stop trying to control others, you 
have to find ways to live together with different goals and different 
ways of  life. If  you want to simplify and the others you live or work 
with  don’t,  how  can  you  peacefully  coexist  in  the  same  space? 
Some possibilities (but nowhere near an exhaustive list): decide who 
owns what and just simplify your own things; split up the house or 
office into your area and theirs; find a happy compromise between 
simplicity and major clutter.
8. Have patience. Don’t expect others to change overnight just 
because you have. The important people in your life might not get 
quite  as excited  about this change,  because  it’s not coming  from 
them. They might not learn it as quickly as you have, or go quite as 
far. Or  they might not want to change  or support your change at 
all, at first… but later, they might come around. Again, don’t push 
or be obnoxious about it, but instead be patient, encouraging, with 
an attitude of  sharing what you’re learning and excited about.
9. Change  what you  can.  Sometimes you  can’t change every-
thing you’d  like, and  you  have to learn to accept that. find areas 
you  can control, find places that others will allow  you  to change, 
and  focus  on  those.  The  other  areas might  come  later  (or  they 
might not). This is what comes from having others in your life — 
you give up complete control, but you also get the wonder of  sharing your life with other human beings, something I’d never give up.
10. find support. If  you can’t get support from some people in 
your  life,  find it elsewhere  if  possible. This might be  from others 
who are doing the same thing as you — friends or family, or people 
in your community. It could  be from online  communities, such as 
social networks or forums. There are tons of  people out there who 
are trying to simplify. Share your  progress, challenges, frustrations 
with them, and you’ll find help from people who understand.

AN OPPORTUNITY TO PRACTICE
Many times there are large parts of  your life you can’t control 
— teenagers must live with the rules of  their parents, for example, 
and  many employees don’t control their  work flow  or  work environment.  This  can  be  extremely  frustrating  if  you’re  trying  to 
change, to live a more effortless life.

If  you have others who try to control you, or who won’t cooperate,  or  who  make  your  life  difficult,  try  a  simple  but  powerful 
method:
Look at every interaction with those people as an opportunity.
• An opportunity to practice patience.
• An opportunity to empathize and find compassion for others.
• An opportunity to let go of  your expectations of  what others 
should do.
• An  opportunity to stop  wishing things were other  than they 
are.
• An opportunity to be grateful in the face of  frustrations.
When  you  see  these  difficult  situations  as an  opportunity  to 
practice these skills, you can see that these people in your life are a 
blessing.

--
You’re Already Perfect

A  lot of  people  read  other  personal  development  blogs  and 
books because they want to improve  something about themselves. 
They’re  not  satisfied  with  their  lives,  they’re  unhappy  with  their 
bodies, they want to be better people.
I know, because I was one of  those people.
This desire to improve myself  and my life was one of  the things 
that led to Zen Habits. I’ve been there, and I can say that it leads to 
a lot of  striving, and a lot of  dissatisfaction with who you are and 
what your life is.
A powerful realization that has helped me is simply this: You’re 
already good  enough,  you  already  have  more  than  enough,  and 
you’re already perfect.
Try saying that to yourself, as corny as that might sound, just to 
see if  it sounds true. Does it resonate as something you already believe  (in which  case, you can probably stop reading now and start 
writing), or does it not feel right? Do you feel like there are things 
you still need to improve?
The thing I’ve learned, and it’s not some new truth but an old 
one that took me much too long to learn, is that if  you learn to be 
content with who you are and where you are in life, it changes everything.
Consider what changes:
• You no longer feel dissatisfied with yourself  or your life.
• You  no  longer  spend  so  much  time  and  energy  wanting to 
change and trying to change.
• You  no  longer  compare  yourself  to  other  people,  and  wish 
you were better.
72• You can  be happy, all the  time, no matter  what happens in 
the world around you.
• Instead  of  trying  to  improve  yourself,  you  can  spend  your 
time helping others.
• You stop spending so much money on things that will supposedly improve your life.
• You can be smug about it, like me.
OK, the  last bit was a joke, but the  rest is true,  in my experience.
And here’s another  realization  that I’ve  written  about before: 
You already have everything you need to be content, right here and 
right now.
Do you have  eyes that see? You  have the  ability to appreciate 
the beauty of  the sky, of  greenery, of  people’s faces, of  water. Do 
you have ears that hear? You have the ability to appreciate music, 
the sound of  rainfall, the laughter of  friends. You  have the ability 
to  feel  rough  denim,  cool  breezes,  grass on  bare  feet…  to  smell 
fresh-cut  grass,  flowers,  coffee…  to  taste  a  plum,  a  chili  pepper, 
chocolate.
This is a miracle, and we take it for granted. Instead, we strive 
for more, when we already have everything. We want nicer clothes, 
cooler gadgets, bigger muscles, bigger breasts, flatter stomachs, bigger  houses,  cars with  leather  seats that  talk to  you  and  massage 
your butt. We’ve kinda gone insane that way.
The sane thing is to realize we don’t need any of that. We don’t 
need to improve our lives. We don’t need to improve ourselves, be-
cause we’re already perfect.
Once you accept this, it frees you.

You’re now free to do things, not because you want to be better, 
but because you love it. Because you’re passionate about it, and it 
gives you joy. Because it’s a miracle that you even can do it.
You’re already perfect. Being content with yourself  means realizing that striving for perfection is based on  someone else’s idea of 
what “perfect” is … and that that’s all bullshit. Perfect is who you 
are, not who someone else says you should be.
You are perfect today. You may be different tomorrow, and you 
will still be perfect.
Now stop reading this, and go be happy.

--
Putting This Book Into Practice

A person  living a complicated life full of  struggle and difficult 
people might find this book a bit overwhelming, though it’s meant 
to be fairly simple.
You might not know where to start, or feel like it’s too difficult 
to make these kinds of  fundamental changes.
It doesn’t have to be a struggle, or overwhelming.  finding effortlessness doesn’t have to require great effort.
Start simply, and  effortlessly. Practice one little  thing, in  small 
bursts throughout the day. 
One step at a time, putting one foot in front of  the other, is how 
you start the journey. It’s how the entire journey is made.
Practice  letting  go  of  expectations  of  others.  Practice  being 
mindful of  when  you  wish  things were  different.  Practice  turning 
complaints into gratitude. Practice stepping back when you start to 
struggle, and letting go of  that struggle. Practice going through life 
with fluidity, with no fixed  plans or expected  outcomes, and being 
adaptable to the inevitable change that comes every day.
Practice  each  of  these  things separately,  one  at  a  time,  and 
you’ll get better with every practice. Soon you’ll be a master.
Some  of  the  ideas in  this book won’t apply to  your  life,  and 
that’s OK.  You don’t have to follow  this as a manual  of  life, but 
more a collection of  loose guidelines meant to help. They work for 
me, but no two people are the  same, and you’ll want to test them 
for yourself. Let me stress that: pick the ideas that work best for you 
-- if  some of  them are objectionable to you, try others.

You  might also  find  that if  you  come  back to  this book  and 
these  ideas later,  more  of  them  will  apply to  your  life  then. I’ve 
found that to  be  true  myself:  sometimes I  reject an  idea as being 
impractical, only to come back to it later and find it to be perfect.
Be flexible. Be forgiving of  yourself. Allow yourself  to practice, 
every day, and  make lots of  mistakes. It’s those  mistakes that will 
help you  learn, as they’ve  helped me. I hope to  make  many mis-
takes as I continue to learn these ideas.


--
Effortless Writing & This Very Book

This book was written using many of  the principles it contains.
I had no goals for  this book. I was just inspired to share some 
ideas about effortless living I’ve been experimenting with, learning 
about, excited about.
I opened an online Google Doc and started writing it, with no 
fixed intentions. Within minutes, I considered the idea of  sharing it 
publicly and writing it with the world watching. Then I considered 
the idea of  allowing anyone to edit it and seeing what unfolded.
That’s a scary idea, but a liberating one. I let go of  control, and 
allowed things to unfold. I let go of  copyright, and gave up owner-
ship of  the text. I have faith in the  compassion  and genius of  humanity.
My daughter asked, “Isn’t that scary?”
I said, “What’s the worst that can happen?”
It was exhilarating to write this way -- it transformed the solitary act of  writing into one that is public, almost performance art, 
and one that is collaborative. There was no control of  the auteur, it 
was the passion of  the crowd.
The writing has been effortless because I’m passionate about it, 
I have no fixed plans or expectations, I’m in no rush, I’m doing it 
mindfully,  and I’m letting others help me  edit, so  I save unnecessary work.
So far, I’ve loved every minute of  it. Thank you, my friends.


--
Contributors

Hundreds of  people contributed  to  this book in  some way, in 
an amazing collaborative effort. I cannot take credit for this book, 
and am grateful for the help others have given. The following are 
among those who helped write & edit this book -- most have gone 
unnamed -- and the contributions of  all are greatly appreciated.
• Squealing Rat
• Oroboros
• Art Awan
• Taara Khalilnaji
• Pat Fuller
• Amy L. Scott
• PaNeal
• Catherine Caine
• Fernando Ibarra-Hernández
• Emma McCreary
• Self-loving Hippie Type
• Jenna Dixon
• Allison Koberstein
• Tony Stark
• Shivaya Wellness / Raven
• Peter Haymond
• Rick Rivera
• Lee Knowlton
78• Jessica Parsons
• David
• Samuel Sandeen
• Dwayne Phillips
• David Paul Mallia
• Sandy Geier